README.md, before:

# Freedom Editor

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](https://img.shields.io/github/license/winston0410/freedom-editor) [![Codacy Badge](https://app.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/9f10837bc1214eedbf60db845cfa0127)](https://www.codacy.com/manual/winston0410/freedom-editor?utm_source=github.com&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=winston0410/freedom-editor&utm_campaign=Badge_Grade) [![JavaScript Style Guide](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg)](https://standardjs.com) [![Known Vulnerabilities](https://snyk.io/test/github/winston0410/freedom-editor/badge.svg?targetFile=package.json)](https://snyk.io/test/github/winston0410/freedom-editor?targetFile=package.json) [![Maintainability](https://api.codeclimate.com/v1/badges/e60c1201866836f735ec/maintainability)](https://codeclimate.com/github/winston0410/freedom-editor/maintainability) [![Test Coverage](https://api.codeclimate.com/v1/badges/e60c1201866836f735ec/test_coverage)](https://codeclimate.com/github/winston0410/freedom-editor/test_coverage) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/winston0410/freedom-editor.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/winston0410/freedom-editor) [![Gitter](https://img.shields.io/badge/chat-gitter(Cantonese)-blueviolet)](https://gitter.im/freedom-editor/Cantonese-only?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge) [![Gitter](https://img.shields.io/badge/chat-gitter(English)-ff69b4)](https://gitter.im/freedom-editor/community?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge)

Freedom Editor is a lightweight, fully extensible, zero-dependencies, framework agonistic block editor. You can use vanilla code or your favorite framework to build blocks you need.

> The block editor for the Free.

## Table Of Contents

- [Features](#features)

  - [Framework agonistic](#framework-agonistic)

  - [Fully customizable and modular](#Fully-customizable-and-modular)

  - [Lightweight and zero-dependencies](#lightweight-and-zero-dependencies)

  - [Other features](#other-features)

- [Background](#background)

  - [What problem does Freedom Editor try to solve?](#what-problem-does-freedom-editor-try-to-solve?)

  - [How does Freedom Editor works?](#how-does-freedom-editor-works?)

  - [Why is it called Freedom Editor?](#why-is-it-called-freedom-editor?)

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)

  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)

  - [Installation](#installation)

  - [Full Code Example](#full-code-example)

  - [Awesome Freedom Editor](#awesome-freedom-editor)

- [API Reference](#api-reference)

- [Optimization](#optimization)

- [Contributing](#contributing)

## Features

### Framework agonistic

Create blocks with vanilla code or with your favorite frontend framework, be it **React, Angular, Vue.js, or lighter frameworks like lighterhtml or Reef**.

### Fully customizable and modular

Unlike other block editors, every parts of Freedom editor is modular except its core loading and saving functions. You can extend it and build whatever you want to control editor and blocks behaviors. Sky is the limit.

### Lightweight and zero-dependencies

The core of Freedom Editor is written in vanilla code, and it only weights **1.5KB gzipped**, tremendously smaller than other block editors.

### Other features

- Predefined block template support
- i18n and rtl support
- Clean JS Object output (You can define your own data structure!)

  ```
  {
    timestamp: 1594882024298,
    data: [{
      data: {
        text: "Testing"
      }
      type: "paragraph"
    }]
  }
  ```

## Background

### What problems does Freedom Editor try to solve?

[Gutenberg editor from Wordpress](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/) has proven the potential of block editor and its advantages over traditional Rich Text Editor like TinyMCE. I really enjoy using it to predefine a specific block layout for users.

As Gutenberg is built around Wordpress API, it is very difficult to apply it somewhere else. Besides, the whole Gutenberg Project was built with React. Fixing myself to a specific framework, and load tons of dependencies (the core of Gutenberg, including React, is about **1MB gzipped**) doesn't sound good to me.

Outside Wordpress and in the NPM world, the most complete block editor was [editor.js](https://editorjs.io/). It is written in vanilla code, and it is much smaller than Gutenberg (the core is about **348kb gzipped**).

This package looked promising in the beginning, as it is very easy to set up, create a new block and get a clean JSON output.

However, editor.js is not really extendable. You have to stick with their defined editor layout, and some crucial features like predefined block template does not exist at all!

After all the frustrations, I decided to build a block editor myself that solves what cannot be solved by these two editors. **Zero-dependencies, lightweight, framework agonistic and completely extendable**.

### How does Freedom Editor works?

The structure of Freedom Editor is simply but robust, it consists of 3 main components, **editor core, blocks and controllers**.

The relationship of these components is linear. Blocks are hooked to editor core, and controllers are hooked to blocks.

Below is the overview of the responsibilities of each component.

**Editor core:** Initiate blocks and controllers and handle saving and loading data globally.

**Blocks:** Provide a specific way for user to input data and save data.

**Controllers:** Transform and control blocks' behaviors **other than loading and saving**.

This structure enables Freedom Editor to be extremely modular and light.

### Why is it called Freedom Editor?

This block editor is named Freedom Editor, as it is extremely modular. Users have endless freedom on modifying this editor unlike others.

Another reason for this is because of what happening in my home, Hong Kong. I hope this project can draw your attentions to what we are facing right now.

## Getting Started

This tutorial will help you set up Freedom Editor in no time.

### Prerequisites

You need to have [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) installed to easily download packages of Freedom Editor. If you don't, download with the following command.

npm will be installed by default when you install Node.js.

```

```

### Installation

Step 1\. Download Freedom editor from npm.

```
npm i @freedom-editor/core
```

Step 2\. Import Freedom Editor to a script for configuration and create a new instance of Freedom Editor.

```
import { FreedomEditor } from '@freedom-editor/core'

const editor = new FreedomEditor({
  containerId: 'freedom-editor',
  defaultBlock: paragraphBlock,
  registeredBlocks: [
    paragraphBlock
  ]
})
```

Step 3\. Call `FreedomEditor.init()` to set up the editor and hook controllers you want to use to blocks.

```
editor.init()
```

Step 4\. Call `FreedomEditor.loadBlocks()` to load blocks from block template or saved data.

```
editor.loadBlocks()
```

Step 5\. Use bundler tools like `rollup.js` to bundle Freedom Editor and other blocks into your configuration file.

#### Using rollup.js

You will need to use plugins like `@rollup/plugin-node-resolve` and `@rollup/plugin-commonjs` to solve all dependencies.

```
//rollup.config.js

const {
  nodeResolve
} = require('@rollup/plugin-node-resolve')

const commonjs = require('@rollup/plugin-commonjs')

export default [{
  input: './src/index.js', // The script which you import Freedom Editor and its blocks
  output: {
    file: './dist/core.esm.js', // Or any file name or file path you like to use in your project
    format: 'esm'
  },
  plugins: [
    nodeResolve({}),
    commonjs({
      include: ['./src/**', 'node_modules/**']
    })
  ]
}
]
```

### Full Code Example

```
import { FreedomEditor } from '@freedom-editor/core'

const editor = new FreedomEditor({
  containerId: 'freedom-editor',
  defaultBlock: paragraphBlock,
  registeredBlocks: [
    paragraphBlock
  ]
})

editor.init()

editor.loadBlocks()
```

As Freedom Editor is very modular, **no blocks or controllers are included by default**. You need to download controllers and blocks to make it useful.

You can find a list of [Freedom Editor controllers and blocks](https://github.com/winston0410/awesome-freedom-editor) here.

### Awesome Freedom Editor

See a list of all awesome Freedom Editor blocks and controllers in our [Awesome Freedom Editor repo](https://github.com/winston0410/awesome-freedom-editor)!

## API Reference

TODO

## Optimization

Although Freedom Editor is designed to be a lightweight block editor, you can make it bloat if you don't set it up correctly. The followings is our optimization suggestions.

### Stick to blocks that are made with the same framework.

Although Freedom Editor enables you to use blocks from different framework by its design, in practice you should only register blocks that are made with the same framework, so that you can avoid loading another framework to your frontend.

### Use bundler to bundle all your blocks into a single file

By bundling all your blocks into a single file, all repeated code(which is likely to be the framework you use) can be combined.

## Contributing

To contribute to Freedom Editor, you can do the followings:

- Improve code in Freedom Editor core

- [Create blocks for Freedom Editor](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/create-first-block.md)

- [Create controllers for Freedom Editor](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/create-first-controller.md)

Check our [project task dashboard](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/projects/1) for tasks labelled with 'good-first-issue' and start contributing easily.

Please read [our contributing guidlines](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) for details of our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/CONDUCT.md) and style guide and code review guide before you start contributing.

## Authors

- **Hugo Sum** - _Initial work_ -

See also the list of [contributors](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/contributors) who participated in this project.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [license](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/LICENSE.md) for more details.

## Acknowledgments

- Inspiration from [Gutenberg editor from Wordpress](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/) and [editor.js](https://editorjs.io/)

Commit message:

:pencil: Add Node.js download command

README.md, after:

# Freedom Editor

[![License](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue)](https://img.shields.io/github/license/winston0410/freedom-editor) [![Codacy Badge](https://app.codacy.com/project/badge/Grade/9f10837bc1214eedbf60db845cfa0127)](https://www.codacy.com/manual/winston0410/freedom-editor?utm_source=github.com&utm_medium=referral&utm_content=winston0410/freedom-editor&utm_campaign=Badge_Grade) [![JavaScript Style Guide](https://img.shields.io/badge/code_style-standard-brightgreen.svg)](https://standardjs.com) [![Known Vulnerabilities](https://snyk.io/test/github/winston0410/freedom-editor/badge.svg?targetFile=package.json)](https://snyk.io/test/github/winston0410/freedom-editor?targetFile=package.json) [![Maintainability](https://api.codeclimate.com/v1/badges/e60c1201866836f735ec/maintainability)](https://codeclimate.com/github/winston0410/freedom-editor/maintainability) [![Test Coverage](https://api.codeclimate.com/v1/badges/e60c1201866836f735ec/test_coverage)](https://codeclimate.com/github/winston0410/freedom-editor/test_coverage) [![Build Status](https://travis-ci.com/winston0410/freedom-editor.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.com/winston0410/freedom-editor) [![Gitter](https://img.shields.io/badge/chat-gitter(Cantonese)-blueviolet)](https://gitter.im/freedom-editor/Cantonese-only?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge) [![Gitter](https://img.shields.io/badge/chat-gitter(English)-ff69b4)](https://gitter.im/freedom-editor/community?utm_source=badge&utm_medium=badge&utm_campaign=pr-badge)

Freedom Editor is a lightweight, fully extensible, zero-dependencies, framework agonistic block editor. You can use vanilla code or your favorite framework to build blocks you need.

> The block editor for the Free.

## Table Of Contents

- [Features](#features)

  - [Framework agonistic](#framework-agonistic)

  - [Fully customizable and modular](#Fully-customizable-and-modular)

  - [Lightweight and zero-dependencies](#lightweight-and-zero-dependencies)

  - [Other features](#other-features)

- [Background](#background)

  - [What problem does Freedom Editor try to solve?](#what-problem-does-freedom-editor-try-to-solve?)

  - [How does Freedom Editor works?](#how-does-freedom-editor-works?)

  - [Why is it called Freedom Editor?](#why-is-it-called-freedom-editor?)

- [Getting Started](#getting-started)

  - [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)

  - [Installation](#installation)

  - [Full Code Example](#full-code-example)

  - [Awesome Freedom Editor](#awesome-freedom-editor)

- [API Reference](#api-reference)

- [Optimization](#optimization)

- [Contributing](#contributing)

## Features

### Framework agonistic

Create blocks with vanilla code or with your favorite frontend framework, be it **React, Angular, Vue.js, or lighter frameworks like lighterhtml or Reef**.

### Fully customizable and modular

Unlike other block editors, every parts of Freedom editor is modular except its core loading and saving functions. You can extend it and build whatever you want to control editor and blocks behaviors. Sky is the limit.

### Lightweight and zero-dependencies

The core of Freedom Editor is written in vanilla code, and it only weights **1.5KB gzipped**, tremendously smaller than other block editors.

### Other features

- Predefined block template support
- i18n and rtl support
- Clean JS Object output (You can define your own data structure!)

  ```
  {
    timestamp: 1594882024298,
    data: [{
      data: {
        text: "Testing"
      }
      type: "paragraph"
    }]
  }
  ```

## Background

### What problems does Freedom Editor try to solve?

[Gutenberg editor from Wordpress](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/) has proven the potential of block editor and its advantages over traditional Rich Text Editor like TinyMCE. I really enjoy using it to predefine a specific block layout for users.

As Gutenberg is built around Wordpress API, it is very difficult to apply it somewhere else. Besides, the whole Gutenberg Project was built with React. Fixing myself to a specific framework, and load tons of dependencies (the core of Gutenberg, including React, is about **1MB gzipped**) doesn't sound good to me.

Outside Wordpress and in the NPM world, the most complete block editor was [editor.js](https://editorjs.io/). It is written in vanilla code, and it is much smaller than Gutenberg (the core is about **348kb gzipped**).

This package looked promising in the beginning, as it is very easy to set up, create a new block and get a clean JSON output.

However, editor.js is not really extendable. You have to stick with their defined editor layout, and some crucial features like predefined block template does not exist at all!

After all the frustrations, I decided to build a block editor myself that solves what cannot be solved by these two editors. **Zero-dependencies, lightweight, framework agonistic and completely extendable**.

### How does Freedom Editor works?

The structure of Freedom Editor is simply but robust, it consists of 3 main components, **editor core, blocks and controllers**.

The relationship of these components is linear. Blocks are hooked to editor core, and controllers are hooked to blocks.

Below is the overview of the responsibilities of each component.

**Editor core:** Initiate blocks and controllers and handle saving and loading data globally.

**Blocks:** Provide a specific way for user to input data and save data.

**Controllers:** Transform and control blocks' behaviors **other than loading and saving**.

This structure enables Freedom Editor to be extremely modular and light.

### Why is it called Freedom Editor?

This block editor is named Freedom Editor, as it is extremely modular. Users have endless freedom on modifying this editor unlike others.

Another reason for this is because of what happening in my home, Hong Kong. I hope this project can draw your attentions to what we are facing right now.

## Getting Started

This tutorial will help you set up Freedom Editor in no time.

### Prerequisites

You need to have [Node.js](https://nodejs.org/en/) installed to easily download packages of Freedom Editor. If you don't, download with the following command.

npm will be installed by default when you install Node.js. Enter the following command in your terminal.

```
curl "https://nodejs.org/dist/latest/node-${VERSION:-$(wget -qO- https://nodejs.org/dist/latest/ | sed -nE 's|.*>node-(.*)\.pkg</a>.*|\1|p')}.pkg" > "$HOME/Downloads/node-latest.pkg" && sudo installer -store -pkg "$HOME/Downloads/node-latest.pkg" -target "/"
```

### Installation

Step 1\. Download Freedom editor from npm.

```
npm i @freedom-editor/core
```

Step 2\. Import Freedom Editor to a script for configuration and create a new instance of Freedom Editor.

```
import { FreedomEditor } from '@freedom-editor/core'

const editor = new FreedomEditor({
  containerId: 'freedom-editor',
  defaultBlock: paragraphBlock,
  registeredBlocks: [
    paragraphBlock
  ]
})
```

Step 3\. Call `FreedomEditor.init()` to set up the editor and hook controllers you want to use to blocks.

```
editor.init()
```

Step 4\. Call `FreedomEditor.loadBlocks()` to load blocks from block template or saved data.

```
editor.loadBlocks()
```

Step 5\. Use bundler tools like `rollup.js` to bundle Freedom Editor and other blocks into your configuration file.

#### Using rollup.js

You will need to use plugins like `@rollup/plugin-node-resolve` and `@rollup/plugin-commonjs` to solve all dependencies.

```
//rollup.config.js

const {
  nodeResolve
} = require('@rollup/plugin-node-resolve')

const commonjs = require('@rollup/plugin-commonjs')

export default [{
  input: './src/index.js', // The script which you import Freedom Editor and its blocks
  output: {
    file: './dist/core.esm.js', // Or any file name or file path you like to use in your project
    format: 'esm'
  },
  plugins: [
    nodeResolve({}),
    commonjs({
      include: ['./src/**', 'node_modules/**']
    })
  ]
}
]
```

### Full Code Example

```
import { FreedomEditor } from '@freedom-editor/core'

const editor = new FreedomEditor({
  containerId: 'freedom-editor',
  defaultBlock: paragraphBlock,
  registeredBlocks: [
    paragraphBlock
  ]
})

editor.init()

editor.loadBlocks()
```

As Freedom Editor is very modular, **no blocks or controllers are included by default**. You need to download controllers and blocks to make it useful.

You can find a list of [Freedom Editor controllers and blocks](https://github.com/winston0410/awesome-freedom-editor) here.

### Awesome Freedom Editor

See a list of all awesome Freedom Editor blocks and controllers in our [Awesome Freedom Editor repo](https://github.com/winston0410/awesome-freedom-editor)!

## API Reference

TODO

## Optimization

Although Freedom Editor is designed to be a lightweight block editor, you can make it bloat if you don't set it up correctly. The followings is our optimization suggestions.

### Stick to blocks that are made with the same framework.

Although Freedom Editor enables you to use blocks from different framework by its design, in practice you should only register blocks that are made with the same framework, so that you can avoid loading another framework to your frontend.

### Use bundler to bundle all your blocks into a single file

By bundling all your blocks into a single file, all repeated code(which is likely to be the framework you use) can be combined.

## Contributing

To contribute to Freedom Editor, you can do the followings:

- Improve code in Freedom Editor core

- [Create blocks for Freedom Editor](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/create-first-block.md)

- [Create controllers for Freedom Editor](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/create-first-controller.md)

Check our [project task dashboard](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/projects/1) for tasks labelled with 'good-first-issue' and start contributing easily.

Please read [our contributing guidlines](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md) for details of our [Code of Conduct](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/blob/master/CONDUCT.md) and style guide and code review guide before you start contributing.

## Authors

- **Hugo Sum** - _Initial work_ -

See also the list of [contributors](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/contributors) who participated in this project.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [license](https://github.com/winston0410/freedom-editor/LICENSE.md) for more details.

## Acknowledgments

- Inspiration from [Gutenberg editor from Wordpress](https://wordpress.org/gutenberg/) and [editor.js](https://editorjs.io/)
